Well, we have looked at the models of the buyer's behavior.
What do we need it for?
Not only to identify the model, not only to understand where to sell, how, but also what to offer, what offer to make so that our client, our buyer, understands that this is his product,
because it satisfies some of his needs.
Well, since we have talked with you about needs and needs, I suggest you remember, just remember the Maslow pyramid.
This is a very famous pyramid that shows how a person develops and what he wants at every stage of his development.
Such a pyramid, which at the base of its own has physiological needs.
This is thirst, this is hunger, this is cold, when you need to dress, for example, and so on.
That is, all the physiological needs that a person must constantly satisfy, otherwise he simply will not be able to live.
So, of course, the first level is physiological needs.
If he is not satisfied with them, you can offer him anything, self-realization, some status, he will not be interested in it at all, because he has not yet taken the first step.
Therefore, at the first stage, of course, the buyer must realize that everything is fine with him.
He has something to eat, something to drink, something to wear, where to live, and so on.
That is, at some level, he has already satisfied his needs and he can think about something more.
And what is next in the pyramid of needs? Of course, safety.
We want to feel safe, we want to understand that nothing threatens us.
And this is actually a very important need, the safety of us, our family, our colleagues, maybe.
Therefore, of course, the second thing a person thinks about is his safety.
If this need is satisfied, he feels that everything is fine, tomorrow he will not be kicked out of work, he will have a stable income, he will be able to satisfy his physiological needs due to this, and he feels calm.
Then he thinks about where he is, in what social environment he lives, who are his colleagues, who are his colleagues at work, who are his friends, who are his family.
Communication is necessary for a person, like air, for someone more, for someone less.
But without this, we cannot live, because we live in a society, and it is important to us who we communicate with and how we communicate.
Therefore, the next need that he satisfies is a need in communication.
When this need is satisfied, then for us the two most interesting stages of this pyramid are self-respect and self-realization.
Self-respect is important for a person.
It is important to understand that, yes, I have achieved something, I am doing it now, someone needs it.
This is a very important point, to be praised, to be understood, otherwise he feels some emptiness.
And the next moment is self-realization, when a person strives for the set goal and, in fact, reaches some heights.
Probably, not all people reach the top of the pyramid, but maybe at some level everyone reaches it.
This is a controversial issue.
But I want to say that when we identify the consumer value, we can guide ourselves very well on the Maslow pyramid.
Because here all the values are there, and you can choose and show what we satisfy with our products.
And it will be completely clear to a person, because it is in the language of people.
I want to give a very simple example.
We all probably eat bread.
I want to give an example with bread.
For example, we wanted to produce a small loaf of bread, 250 grams, not as usual, but 250 grams.
What is it for?
And how to show its benefit and its advantages?
Very simple.
We make a table and make two columns.
In the first column we show the benefit for the consumer or for the client.
And in the second column we show what motive we satisfy, or rather what need we offer.
So, look at what happens here.
What are the benefits for the consumer?
For example, bread is always fresh.
Since it is small, we can buy it often.
It is not necessary to buy a large loaf of bread.
The second point is that it is cheaper when buying.
Maybe we have a limited amount of money, we want to buy something else.
We save a little on this.
Next, no waste.
We do not throw away bread.
Because the loaf is small, we eat it.
And we do not throw away our products and our means.
The next point is that it is convenient to wear.
Maybe I have such a heavy bag, and the loaf is big.
It is impossible to make this knife.
Therefore, a small loaf will make it easy for me to walk with it.
The next point is the ability to buy other products.
The range is different.
I will not only buy bread, but something else.
Or maybe I will buy two different loaves of bread of different varieties.
As an option.
For example, we have identified such benefits.
What can a person get from such a small loaf of bread?
And now, a satisfying motive.
What do we satisfy every time?
Always fresh is safety.
We do not get poisoned.
At least it will not spoil.
Cheaper when buying.
The motive of saving.
No waste is also saving.
We do not throw away our means.
The next point is that it is convenient to wear.
And this is comfort.
And it is possible to buy other products.
Different range.
This is also comfort.
It is convenient for us.
It is good for us.
When you sign the benefit for the buyer in such a language,
you understand why he does it.
And it is easier for you to sell.
Because you will speak his language.
I will give another example from the industrial market,
which will show how you can sign benefits and advantages.
And I will give an example on the lifts.
On the lifts, this is such a device.
Hydraulic lift.
On which you become, press the button,
and rise to a height of 12.5 meters.
It is suitable for construction works.
It is suitable for exhibitions, museums, art galleries.
A very good device that makes work safer
than climbing stairs.
A person feels safer, more comfortable.
And so on.
Let's see what table we made
when we identified the consumer value for this product.
The first is the feature.
Here we write consumer values.
What can we offer?
What consumer things are important for the lift?
And we write that this is reliability.
This is reliability.
You get up, rise, do not fall anywhere.
Everything is clear, good and not scary.
A reliable device.
Next. Features.
What features can we show?
Unique guide technology.
What is it?
The telescopic lift works on the principle of a telescopic antenna.
And when you press the button, you just easily rise up.
This unique guide technology allows you to smoothly lift a person without jerks.
Next. What are the advantages?
What do we show?
The ability to rise to a height without help.
We do not need to attract someone.
We do not need to force someone to work extra.
We can do it ourselves.
Again, economy, comfort.
What benefits does the company that buys such a lift get?
First, convenience.
Second, time saving.
Because you do not need to involve additional people.
Everything can be done yourself and quickly.
Next. Energy saving and fast results.
You do not need to wait for anyone.
Everything can be done yourself.
And the evidence that we provide for the fact that it really is so.
The lift works independently.
Independently, reliably, without help.
This is how you can sit down and schedule your products or services.
This is a very useful thing, because then you understand why your product is being bought.
And then it is very easy for you to present and sell it.
Because you clearly understood the needs of the buyers, your advantages, and combined all this.
Here is such an example.
I recommend it.
Very useful exercise to understand your assortment very well.
The next step.
Well, we have considered the models of buyer behavior.
And I want to move on to the next point.
When we already know how our buyers buy.
When we know our target segments.
The next step we can take is to turn to our most important clients.
This is what we will be considering now.
The first thing I suggest is to return to segmentation, but only to micro-segmentation.
Micro-segmentation is the division within the company of clients.
That is, we do not divide the external market, but within the company.
We consider what clients we have and how they work.
The next method.
We assess by two main groups of parameters.
The first is the attractiveness of the client for the company.
That is, how interesting is the client to us.
And the second point.
Are we interesting to him?
Very few companies ask such a question, unfortunately.
In fact, thanks to the fact that we ask this question, we will get very interesting answers.
What are we doing?
In each group we write down the criteria for assessment.
This is the volume of deliveries, the regularity of deliveries, the potential profit,
compatibility, the growth of the company in the market, the availability of warehouses and logistics.
You can adjust the criteria that will be interesting to you.
The main task is to assess the client's attractiveness.
That is, to see how interesting he is to you.
You can put financial stability here.
The criteria can be completely different.
Experience of work in the market, etc.
What do you do next?
And then you set the weights in the amount.
The weight should be 10 points.
Here is an example.
You can take 1 in the amount.
In the example, in the method, 10 points.
Set the weights.
That is, look at which criteria are most important.
And assign the most weight.
Then start evaluating the company by points.
The point is evaluated from 1 to 9 points.
From 1 to 9 points.
An assessment is carried out, and then the rating is set.
Weight per point, weight per point, weight per point.
What is done next?
The sum is added by points.
And you get a point for each company.
You can have an infinite number of clients.
If you have 200, then maybe all 200 should be evaluated.
The example is given here for two clients.
The assessment is carried out by the company's expert council.
These are sales managers, all commercial employees,
who are only associated with these clients.
Marketologists can be managers of the middle class.
The middle class is those who are related to marketing and sales.
And we move on to the second assessment.
The second assessment is our ability to serve these clients.
That is, to see if they are interested in us or not.
And here we make the following criteria.
Assortment. Does our assortment suit them?
Does their quality of our products suit them?
Next. Is our market experience sufficient to offer them products or services?
What do they think?
Next. Do we provide technical support to these companies?
Next point. What is the qualification of our staff?
And our financial stability in the market?
That is, this assessment is already from the clients.
Here we put more weight.
We took 100, although it could also be 10,
but we took 100 points so that there was more sensitivity,
more options, more assessments.
Next. We put points in the same way and multiply the weight by a point,
weight by a point, and then add the sum by a column.
And we get two assessments for each company.
One from our point of view, and the other from the client's point of view.
What do we get?
We get the following graph, which is presented to you on the slide.
This is a matrix of internal segmentation of clients.
And here we have divided into four groups.
Our clients are divided.
Each client has two coordinates.
We got the market attractiveness and, in fact,
the attractiveness of us as a company.
So, we build on the coordinates of our company and get some results.
What are the four groups here?
These are developing key clients,
these are just key clients, standard clients, and potential clients.
In brackets, we can write that they are not attractive for us,
or not promising, because two groups will be added here.
I will comment on each group and what we get.
The first group is developing clients.
Attractiveness.
That is, we are interested in this client, but we are not very interested in him.
He works with us until he finds another supplier, maybe.
Key clients.
We are interested in them, and they are interested in us.
That is, mutual satisfaction occurs.
And we have found a common language and work very well together.
Standard clients.
We are interested in them, but they are not very interested in us.
They develop poorly.
And they buy something, sell something.
Not as we would like.
The question is what to do with them. We will see.
And potential clients, or, as I said, not attractive.
Maybe these are new clients with whom you have just started working,
and you still cannot assess how they work for you and whether they like you or not.
Or maybe these are clients who have been in this square for a long time.
They take away your funds, resources, money, people's time.
And they do not give results.
That is, there can be at least two categories here.
Well, let's see what each category means.
Key clients are, of course, the gold mine of the company.
This is active support, these are preferences.
Anything that can be supported by any support.
The only subtlety.
Never allow at least one client to occupy more than 20% of your turnover.
Otherwise you will get addicted to him.
He will start manipulating you.
Setting his rules, prices, delivery times, payment time, and so on.
That is, you get addicted.
Therefore, no matter what key clients there are, be sure to feel this limit.
The next group of clients is developing clients.
That is, we really like this client, but we do not satisfy him in something.
We do not have enough opportunities to work with them actively.
That's why we have to do something here.
We must clearly consider what events we must hold to transfer these clients to the key category.
This is our job within our company.
We must clearly understand what we are aiming at.
The next group of clients is standard.
As we said, we like them very much, but we do not like them very much.
What do we do here?
Here we make decisions.
Either we start to develop them and understand how they grow.
Or we make decisions if there is no prospect, and whether to continue working with them.
That is, there must be a very serious decision here.
It's like in relationships between people.
Do you like it or not?
If you don't like it, what to do next?
Either leave and go, or not contact.
Or understand where to find the best sides and how to develop our relations.
The same is true with clients.
And potential clients, or not promising.
As I said, two groups come here.
New ones come here because we are not actively working with them yet, and they are not actively working with us.
Then we will look at the new clients separately, at the steps that need to be taken.
And if these are clients who have long been in this square, then you need to make a decision whether to continue working with them.
Completely clearly understanding that these clients only distract you with money and funds.
They can be called sick children of these clients.
Why? Or hard children.
Because they distract a lot of attention, but in fact they do not give any benefit.
Therefore, be very careful with this category.
Well, colleagues, let's consider who are the key clients.
We have highlighted them according to the method we have just considered.
And what to do next with them and what do they represent?
The first point.
Key clients are those who, of course, steadily generate income and profits.
Of course, clients can be different.
They can be very large and require very large discounts, and then the profit may be slightly less in percentage terms.
But due to the turnover they bring to us, the profit, of course, is a significant part of all clients.
Very often the Pareto rule is also used here, which says that 80% of the income brings 20% of the clients.
These are just your key clients.
The next point that we take into account.
Key clients allow us to reduce costs.
Why? We do not need to send a lot of products to different small clients.
We send it all in batches, sell it in batches, produce it well, and the cost is reduced by a unit of production.
Naturally, the cost is also reduced.
Another point to consider.
The key client company that works with you, takes a lot of turns,
seeks to improve your position in the market, your offer,
because it helps you promote this product.
They themselves are interested in this, in addition to having the opportunity to sell large batches of products.
The next point is very important.
Key clients help to bring new products to the market.
As I said, new products are always high risks and problems that arise in the market.
Therefore, it is important to offer new products to key clients.
They will help you to bring your new product to the market more professionally
and solve all the issues at the stage of release.
Another point that can characterize key clients.
This is a client who is politically significant to us.
For example, he is in some region or some industry,
but he represents us in this market, he has an administrative resource at the local level,
and he positions us more correctly, more clearly.
That is, we simply cannot break off relations with him,
because otherwise we will not be able to actively and well enter this region.
Another point that characterizes key clients in the same way.
A client is interested in servicing his product, or rather in servicing our product.
A service service can be created,
maybe technical and service support for other clients,
end consumers to whom he sells our product.
It is very important when there is service service,
because today, as I said at the beginning, the price is only in the 7th place,
so service plays one of the primary roles.
And this is exactly what a key client helps us with.
What are the advantages of key clients?
What do they give to the company?
Although I want to say that when we select key clients,
it is important for us to know another thing.
What do we give to our clients?
Why do they work so well with us?
Why do they take such a large amount of our products?
Why do they consider us their partners?
Nevertheless, of course, by setting a goal, setting a strategy,
we must also evaluate our advantages.
What do they give us?
As I said, this is the first significant share of the turnover,
the volume of our sales and the stability of planning.
Further.
If we have guaranteed sales,
then we can make large purchases,
which gives additional discounts.
That is, we again reduce costs and reduce costs.
The next point is the reduction of costs,
which is associated with attracting new clients.
If we did not have our key, such good clients,
we would have to make attempts again and again to find new clients.
And this, as we have already said, is a very large cost.
In this sense, we also save money and optimize our resources.
The next point is that marketing costs are reduced.
Why?
First, we have already attracted them.
And secondly, key clients often invest their funds,
part of their funds, to promote our product,
because they also need to offer it further, sell it, promote it.
As for new products,
again, the advantage is that this group of clients allows us to test their new product,
test it on the market, see how it is progressing,
listen to their advice, opinions, even look for new ideas.
Key clients often give new ideas for the production of our products.
And, of course, competition and stability in the market are growing.
That is, there is a greater barrier for competition.
If we have a very good relationship with a key client,
it means that he will not switch with any small change in the price policy of our competitors.
The next factor is that the image of reliability and stability of the company is formed,
not only in the eyes of key clients,
but, importantly, in the eyes of our own employees.
Employees understand that the company is stable, the company is developing well,
it has permanent clients, it will never die on this market and will not disappear.
In the same way, for investors, when we want to launch a new product
and we need additional investments,
this stability helps us show how well we are in this market,
what small risks we have.
The next thing is that operational work is simplified.
Less overhead costs are needed, less additional transport is needed,
fewer warehouse costs.
That is, look how many additional advantages.
The next point is that we can ask key clients for information
about the actions of competitors, about the situation on the market,
how they are developing.
When we have trust between us, they are willing to share this information.
Naturally, we reduce money on research.
The next point is that clients become advertising agents.
They tell about our product, they attract more clients to it.
That is, again, a reduction in advertising costs.
Another very important point is that we increase the share of the client's turnover.
It is very difficult for the client to break our relations with him,
because we are already significant to him.
Naturally, in this way, we also increase our presence and share on this market.
Advantages of the Advertising Platform
We have discussed the advantages.
But how can we work with these clients?
What practice does exist?
There is a whole algorithm of how we approach our key clients.
And we have already discussed during our communication
what steps we take.
Some of them have already been discussed.
The first is, of course, the general market.
Then we divide it into segments.
We have discussed the methods.
Then we choose the optimal segments.
These are the ones we can work with.
There are two target segments.
And the next one is the segment with the possibility of partial consumption.
This is what we have discussed.
Then we choose the target from the optimal.
That is, we narrow the market.
In the target segment, we select significant clients.
Those who are not really small, not disposable clients,
but those with whom we work stably and have a more or less serious turnover.
And only from significant clients we select a group of key ones.
Not all significant clients need to be built client-oriented relationships.
Remember, we were considering the methodology.
There are developing clients.
They are in the category of significant, but not key.
Our task is to create as many key clients as possible.
To make our relationships partner-oriented and stable
in order to get all the advantages that we have discussed above.
Client-oriented companies that have been working on this market for a long time
have received serious results in favor of the fact that such a strategy brings money.
According to the data of the Association of Managers, which conducted research last year,
I would like to give you some results to convince you of the seriousness of such work.
The first point that companies working on this strategy note
is the increase in the number of re-purchases.
66% is a very large percentage, you must agree.
The reduction in costs by 81%.
Can you imagine what a serious reduction in costs,
what kind of optimization a company can get in such a work?
The next point is the reduction in losses caused by customer dissatisfaction.
The client did not like something, he took a claim, left, did not tell you anything.
In fact, when we work with our key clients seriously,
we evaluate their claims, solve their problems,
the loss of clients is reduced by 77%.
The attraction of new clients is 51%.
Why? They look at the market and see a stable company,
and they become interested in working.
Our key clients talk about us, work as advertising agents
and attract additional new clients to our company.
This is our new potential.
Accordingly, we also reduce costs for attracting new clients.
The increase in productivity of work is 80% due to the reduction of operational work.
The company spends a lot of money,
and we save 80% of all operational work.
The next result achieved by the company is the acceleration of the import of new products to the market.
The reduction of risks of this import is 46%.
46% is a very good result, because a new product is always a risk.
Another point is the reduction of the risk of losing clients.
When does this risk arise?
When our key managers leave.
And this happens, unfortunately.
Life is life, everyone is looking for the best place under the sun.
Therefore, one way or another, our employees will change their job,
will leave, improve their qualifications, grow.
Therefore, it happens very often that a key manager leaves the company.
Clients leave with him.
Because the relationship is very important in this case.
When we do a full-fledged job with a key client,
clients stay, because they are attached not only to the manager,
not only to his personal qualities or characteristics,
not only to his promises, but to the company itself,
which fulfills its obligations, supplies goods, reduces costs,
and provides competitive products.
The client is attached to us.
And 76% is the result achieved by companies that work according to this strategy.
I think these figures are more than convincing.
We need to understand whether we are a client-oriented company or not.
There are methods for assessing client-orientedness.
The methods are different.
Different authors provide their variations.
I want to offer you one of them.
In fact, any method, both this and all the others that we are considering,
is a method of client-orientedness.
It is a method of client-orientedness,
which is based on the idea that the client is a client.
And this and all the others that we are considering
must be adapted to your company.
Otherwise, it will be a dead method, it will not work.
That is, it needs to be adjusted to the activity of your industry,
your product, your company.
We will consider one of the methods that helps you assess
how loyal clients are to you
and whether your company is client-oriented to this day.
The method consists of six main blocks.
That is, we assess the company in six blocks.
This is internal support, team dynamics,
relations with clients, client status,
further on, work with the client that is being conducted,
project management.
We will consider all six points in detail.
The first item is internal support and opportunities of our company.
This item assesses how well your work on key clients is built inside the company.
Do you have support from the management?
Is a business process designed to be directed only to key clients?
Does the team or the team leader have certain powers
in terms of making decisions?
Does he have resources?
And does he not interfere with other functional units
in solving your issues?
For example, the financial service, the delivery service,
the delivery service that can sabotage the delivery of some product
that is important for your key client.
Here you can add various criteria.
These four criteria are the basic ones
on which you set the assessment and compare.
In your workbook, the method will be fully described.
In the slides, we see the final schedule.
In the workbook, you will be able to assess
how client-oriented your company is.
The next item is the dynamics of the team
in working with key clients.
What is included here?
The first point that we must assess
is whether you have a plan for working with key clients.
The plan, the result that you should achieve,
the efficiency indicators, and so on.
Next.
How is communication established inside the unit?
How do you cooperate with each other,
how do you agree on things,
how do you help each other solve problems?
Next.
Is communication established between your unit
and the unit of the key client?
Look, there can be different units.
There can be a company manager,
a commercial director, a purchase director.
With all these people making decisions
or participating in making decisions,
clear communication should be established.
Another point that needs to be assessed
is whether your employees have the skills
to work with key clients.
In fact, this is a very important point,
because if non-professional people
work in such a responsible team,
it can lead to the failure of all your efforts
and all your investments.
The next block is the relationship with clients.
We assess what kind of relationship we have with them.
The first block that we assess,
or rather the first criterion,
is whether you have information
about who in the company makes decisions
or participates in making decisions.
Roughly speaking, who do you need to establish
clear contacts with
to facilitate the quick resolution
of all issues that arise in the process of activity.
Next point.
Do you know what values your client has?
What is really important to them?
What is the company's goal?
What technologies do they use in their work?
Knowing what they use in their work,
it will be easier for you to offer them
an additional product or improve the existing product.
Next.
Do you have a common goal or a common project?
This point is very important,
because having a common goal and a common project,
you can attach more strongly to yourself
a key client.
And, in fact, do you have a common business process?
This is also a good point,
because when the business processes are common,
the logic of the action is clearly clear.
It is easier to work.
The next block that we assess is the status.
The status of a key client,
of us as a supplier,
how he treats us.
Are we a key supplier for him?
Is our status growing year by year
or quarter by quarter?
Does the client take us into a serious position
and does he communicate well with us?
Do our assortments and quality of services
suit him?
That is, how much of the full range
do we provide him with the necessary products and services?
The next block that we assess is the work with clients.
How is it carried out?
The first criterion that is here
is your business is focused on a key client.
And the key client is more important to you
than the minute profit.
You know, this is a very controversial point,
especially for the company managers.
Nevertheless, I want to say
that today's profit is just today,
and the relationship with the client
is your future and your development.
So choose what is more important to you.
The next point that we assess
is the analysis of the positive impact
of working with key clients.
Do we look at the dynamics?
Do we see how our profit grows,
how our turnover grows,
how our status rises?
This, of course, is also assessed.
And two more points that need to be taken into account.
First, do you have events with key clients?
Unofficial events.
Do you have any outing meetings?
Are there any corporate parties?
Are there any general holidays?
Because we understand perfectly well
that work is work,
but personal relationships also need to be built.
Because it is then that trust appears,
personal relationships appear,
connections that cannot be replaced.
And one more point is the system of work
with claims of key clients.
It must be a worked-out business process
that clearly tells you
how you should act
in case of a claim of a client.
We will look at it in addition.
And another block is project management.
Do you have joint projects with key clients?
We assess.
Next, how is the work with these projects going?
Is the expectation of efficiency
in working with these projects assessed?
Is the assessment of the profitability
of these projects carried out?
All these factors are included
in the project management block.
When you look at this method in your workbook,
you will be able to assess
the client-orientedness of your company
and check.
There will be all the decoding.
We talked about control,
because without control we do not understand
the effectiveness of our work.
That is why I would like to give you
the main indicators
that you can choose from the entire list
for control of key clients.
Maybe you will not take all of them
as indicators of efficiency,
but you can choose some of them
and apply them in your work.
What are these indicators?
The first is the number of clients.
Including new clients,
that is, not necessarily key,
we are looking at the client base now,
and the growth rate.
It is not a secret that
the clients are rotated.
Someone leaves, someone comes.
We need to understand
the stability of our client base.
The next point is the volume of sales
for clients,
including in the segment.
Remember we said that
each segment can have its key clients.
Therefore, here we are evaluating
in this section.
Next, the number of permanent clients.
How many of them are there?
How many of them are significant?
We also look at how the indicator
grows from period to period.
For example, the number of significant
clients increases or, on the contrary,
decreases.
Then this is an alarming signal.
Naturally, you have to take some measures.
The next point, which is very interesting
in the assessment, is the volume of
unpaid funds or unpaid profits.
We evaluate and add up all the contracts
that have collapsed for some reason.
We look at how much
we have not received the funds.
The dynamics of this indicator
is very important
because it should naturally decrease
if we work with key clients.
The next point is the average time
of signing a contract.
We said that when we work with key clients,
the time for operational activity decreases.
Therefore, of course, this indicator
should also decrease.
If this happens, then our work
is moving in the right direction.
The client loyalty index
is based on the market clients,
on the dynamics of their changes,
and so on.
We have already looked at the client loyalty index.
You can easily assess this indicator.
The next point is the specific weight
of the temporarily completed orders
to the total number of orders.
It is not a secret that we can receive an order,
but we do not have any assortment.
We cannot fulfill this order now.
We either postpone it,
if the client is waiting,
then we postponed and completed the order,
or if the client cannot wait,
even if he is very loyal to us,
he goes to another client,
to our competitor,
and we risk losing him.
Therefore, it is very important
to see how the orders
that have been received
are temporarily fulfilled.
The number of clients' complaints.
If you are working with key clients,
this indicator should also decrease.
The next point is the number
of complaints from clients.
This indicator should decrease.
Another point is the average
duration of the work.
This is from the first contact
with a new client
to the completion of the client.
How long does it take?
This indicator should also decrease.
If it decreases,
it shows that your company
is working more efficiently.
The average time for coordination
of questions between departments.
This indicator is for the internal company,
for key clients.
The less signatures,
the less interference in the activity,
the faster we make the order,
work more clearly with key clients,
and receive less complaints.
Therefore, this is also
one of the good indicators
that characterizes the activity
of your company and its success.
Another indicator is the financial one.
This indicator can be evaluated
if you have a management accounting system.
Because you need to pay
all the costs to key clients.
Here you can see
the optimization of all costs
and benefits you get
from working with key clients.
This is the rotation of the client base,
the growth of income,
the reduction of operating costs,
the additional price bonus
you receive.
These indicators are determined.
If you have a management accounting system,
it is not difficult to evaluate them.
I would like to say
that, of course,
when working with key clients,
the function and role of the key client manager
is very important.
Many companies
now create departments
with so-called
key account managers.
These are key client managers.
Those who work on the FMCG market
are usually network managers.
Because the network is a very serious client
where you cannot miss any deadlines
because you will be fined
immediately.
You cannot change the assortment.
There are very serious business processes.
And, of course, companies
do it on their own,
not through intermediaries.
They select key managers
who would ensure the control
and execution of all actions
that are necessary
to ensure effective
work with key clients.
I want to discuss
the functions of these managers.
What should they do
and how should they work?
The first thing I want to say
is the data base management.
Any manager's activity
starts with data base management.
There is even a saying
that a sales manager
costs as much as his data base.
This is the main asset
of any manager.
It is a pity that not everyone
understands this.
But in fact, it is a very important indicator.
The first thing a key client manager
should do
is to create a database.
The indicators we collect
from clients are being developed.
All the information about clients,
key people,
the assortment they deal with,
their preferences,
their capabilities,
their development.
The bigger your database,
the better your key client manager will work.
There is a book
by Harvey McKay
called How to Survive Among Sharks.
Harvey McKay
offers
66 questions
in the book
that should be put into the client database.
Only then it will work effectively.
He tells
how to work
with key clients.
It is a very important and interesting book.
I recommend you to read it.
Maybe you won't choose all the 66 questions,
but some of them
should definitely get into your database.
The next point,
the next function of a key client manager
is, of course,
selection of a nomenclature
or assortment for a key client.
Here you need to consider the specificity of the client,
his price category
in which he offers the product,
his experience of working in the market,
his preferences in a given region.
There may be
some special preferences in the assortment.
It occurs in most products and goods.
Therefore,
the function of a manager
is to adjust the assortment
to the client's requirements, to the client's wishes.
Not just to sell
what we need, but to see
what the client wants and, of course,
to form this assortment.
To form it taking into account the profitability,
taking into account the turnover, and so on.
Of course, taking into account the interests of the companies,
but also taking into account the interests of our key client.
The next point
is planning and ordering the assortment.
You know, key clients
take a big turn.
If we do not worry in advance,
do not make an order,
our supply department may simply not deliver it.
The client has received the order,
there is no product in the warehouse,
the client leaves.
Therefore, a clear and clear
system of orders is necessary.
For a certain time,
that is, a business process is scheduled,
and the manager should have a red flag
and say that there will be an order,
you need to see if there will be such an amount of the assortment,
and so on.
This is also one of its basic functions.
Further. Forming a sales forecast.
Of course, together with the key client.
Not just that I sat and thought,
let's sell this much.
Be sure to consult
with the key client.
What is he planning?
What are his development plans?
Where does he want to offer this assortment?
Why is this particular assortment
of goods interesting to him?
And in what volume and what batches
is he going to buy it?
This often happens
before the planning period.
When we form our sales forecast,
then we communicate
with our key clients.
And in fact,
key clients are the basis
of the sales forecast.
These 20% of clients
that form 80% of the turnover.
Therefore, it is very important for us
to understand, prescribe and agree.
Then the client will not feel
that the plan is imposed on him.
And he is simply forced,
forced to fulfill this plan.
He will understand that he agrees with him.
He gave himself a report
on what decisions he made.
And the plan will be much easier to fulfill.
And the motivation will be stronger.
Because this is his decision too.
The next important point.
The offer for the price of education.
Of course, you can often understand
that the clients,
because they take a lot of turns,
they try to impose their conditions on us.
But of course,
we take into account their interests
and our own.
Through negotiations,
we reach a common opinion.
Maybe a compromise.
Maybe we come to some decision.
But the price offer
is a very important point.
Because here the discount works.
Here we immediately get the result
on the marginal income
taking into account all the costs.
This is the financial result of the company.
One of the main reasons
why we work for profit.
Therefore, the price offer
is formed by the manager
according to the key clients.
He agrees with the key client.
And then this offer is already approved
or changed in some way
at the level of the general director
of your company.
Another important point.
This is the planning of the promotional campaign.
There are marketologists,
there are brand managers,
there are someone else
who is engaged in the development of promotional campaigns.
But only the manager
according to the key clients
can agree on the action
that will really give an effect.
Because maybe there is some specificity
in the region.
Some action does not go there at all,
but will go to another type of action.
And of course, you need to take into account
the specificity of the region,
the specificity of the industry,
the specificity of the client.
And taking into account this,
to coordinate the time,
the idea of the promotion,
the budget for it.
All this is the responsibility
of the key client,
or rather the manager according to the key clients.
To coordinate the work with the key client
on the promotion of various promotions
in support of our products.
The control of the client's merchandising standards.
This is the same as in the fast-food market
or in the fast-food market.
Where you need to develop a plan,
merchandising standards,
make a very clear spread
so that your product is noticed,
seen and bought.
What I want to say here.
We can impose our standards in the same way.
But maybe there is some specificity
of the retail industry
that we do not know.
Maybe we were not in this region.
For example, if you take
the city of Khabarovsk,
then there is the biggest turnover
of retail stores
in the category C.
In the case of the shop trade.
Compare it with St. Petersburg,
for example.
Not even with Moscow,
but with St. Petersburg.
A completely different situation.
There is a major turnover
of stores in the category A, B.
And the network, of course.
We don't even consider the network.
And, of course,
there will be different strategies of work
in different regions.
And different assortment,
including different merchandising standards.
Because we can't put an infinite number
of products on the shelf of a small store.
That is why the function of the manager
on key customers
is to coordinate this important issue.
When do we get new products?
Or suddenly there is some problem.
The product is out of date,
it needs to be sold.
We form a proposal with the key customer.
What to do with it?
How to promote a new product?
How to present it better?
How to position it better?
Where to offer it better?
At what point of sale?
And if it is a problematic product
that needs to be sold,
we agree with our actions
with our key customers.
They help us by sharing their experience.
And they say, do it this way.
We have already done it.
We have not made any losses.
And by the moment of agreement
we make
certain decisions.
Another main function
of the manager on key customers
is a presentation
to the customer of our new product.
Of course, a manager should have
the skills of presenting.
Because we should clearly show
what our customer wins,
why he should buy
our new product,
why he should test it
on this market.
He should collect such information
as feedback.
Therefore, the presentation
of a new product to a customer
is a function of a manager
on key customers.
And it often happens that a manager
goes to his key customer,
gathers his clients,
and there he holds a presentation,
tells them about the advantages
and advantages of our product.
And it works very well.
Therefore,
the skills of presentation
are necessary skills for such a qualified person.
Another important point.
Maybe it is
auxiliary, but important.
It is the formation of reserves
for pre-orders.
Imagine a holiday.
For example, before the New Year,
when there is not enough product,
when everything goes to waste,
when sales volume
grows by 200%,
in some categories of products by 250%.
What do we get?
We get a deficit.
So,
a key customer manager
must control
a certain reserve
of products for his key customer.
So that
key customers do not run out of products.
It is they who make more turnover.
It is on them that we save
our costs.
And what's the point if we give our products
to small customers
and get nothing in return?
It is a completely different thing
when we give preferences
to key customers.
And this is very important.
The next function is to track contract terms.
As you know, a contract is
for a certain period of time.
It is not temporary.
It can be for a year,
for two, for three.
A key customer manager
must track
the terms of the contract,
and understand
when it ends
so that before the end
he can review all the terms,
talk to the client,
agree, approve,
and sign a new contract
before the end of the contract
with the key customer.
Or he can sign a prolongation agreement
if the terms do not change.
It often happens in companies
that there are many key customers
or they are not paid much attention
to them.
And they just
forgot to look at the contract.
The contract ended today
to conclude a new one.
It is necessary to have time.
And we miss
our delivery opportunities.
There is no contract, no sale.
Therefore,
it is important to track
the terms of the contract
and the business process
how to agree and sign
everything before the end of the contract.
By the way,
every key customer manager
must know
the date
when the contract ends
and the key customer manager
must know
the date when the contract ends.
It is a good key customer manager.
The moment of operational work
is not important.
It is just a technical sale.
Contract, account,
deposit,
delivery schedule,
payment schedule,
budget planning.
All this operational activity
is not taken off the key manager.
He does it all
according to his clients
and, preferably,
according to the business process.
One of the important points
of the contract is
the continuation of relations
between the key manager
and the key customer manager.
This is necessary
to understand
what the key customer
is interested in
and what he can discuss
with him.
It is necessary
to find common interests
and to find a reason
to share some news
about the victory of our football team
or the victory of our biathlonists.
It is necessary to understand
what the client is interested in
and to develop relations in this direction.
There are two main functions.
The first one is
to process the claims of the clients.
Who, as a key customer manager,
will process the claims
or control the processing?
The key customer manager
will process the claims
and will control the process
to satisfy the claims.
This is a very important point
without which the clients
will leave you.
Another point
is to decide
what to do next
with the key customers
and what suggestions
the manager can make.
He is a high-ranking manager
and he has to make suggestions
on the development of relations
with the key customers.
What ideas does he have?
What does he propose?
Why does he propose it?
What funds are needed for this?
And what result do we plan to get?
We have discussed the functions
of a key customer manager.
He is a mini-manager of a company
because he has a lot of functions.
And there are such functions.
He has
the authority
to make decisions
with our most important clients.
And if the company is stable,
he is a mini-manager.
And he has to be positioned
with the same responsibility
and the same results.
Let's look at
the scheme of working with claims.
Such a scheme
or business process
should be registered in each company.
Regardless of whether you work
with a key client
in a special way or not.
But for a key client
it is the most important parameter
because they should feel
your feedback
to understand
that their problems are being solved.
Where does such a scheme of work begin?
Of course, with a claim.
Here it is.
What to do with it?
The first thing a key client manager
should do is to ask questions
and understand what the problem is.
He should inform the client
that he has a procedure
and that he has two days
to consider and make a decision.
And in four days
he will get the result.
The client should not worry
and think whether he was accepted
or not.
The next thing is
that the manager
looks at the problem
and starts to cooperate
with other companies.
If it is a logistic problem,
he should work with logistics.
If it is a financial problem,
he should work with financial structure.
The problem is related to the company
and the manager
should contact the company.
He starts to find out
whether the problem is being solved
or not.
If the problem is not solved
and the situation is not working out,
then a standard procedure
is launched
in the company.
How do we react to this problem?
Maybe we return the money.
Maybe we accept the return of the goods
and apologize.
Maybe we offer some services
for free as a bonus
so that the client does not worry
and understands that we reacted to his claim
and although we cannot do anything with it,
some measures are taken.
This is the first option.
If we have a solution,
we solve the problem.
We change the goods,
pay the bills,
and so on,
we eliminate the problem.
When we have done all this,
the next step is to document
everything that happened,
what was the claim,
whether it was solved or not,
how it happened,
who was involved in this problem,
why it occurred,
how they reacted.
This is a separate database
that allows you
to analyze these things
and make decisions
and not make repeated mistakes.
This is especially important.
We are given experience
not to make repeated mistakes.
Therefore, it is necessary to document the process.
When the analysis is completed,
it is sent to the companies
that were involved
in solving this problem.
This is necessary
so that each unit
understands its responsibility
and does not shift it.
It is necessary to understand
how to act next time
so that such a problem does not occur again.
If the problem is not solved,
it is not solved because
the company does not have the opportunity,
but because the procedure is not prescribed
and no one needs anything in the company.
Then we either change
or create a new procedure.
Otherwise,
you simply will not be able
to work with key clients.
As with all other problems,
any clients must be satisfied,
but the key ones
should be in the first place.
I would like to tell you
one more important point
that I think will be important for you.
How to plan work
with key clients?
We found out the advantages,
we looked at the main functions,
how to plan this work.
The first is, of course,
the client profile or database
that we make.
We must understand
what will be in this database,
who will work on it,
who will supplement,
who will analyze, and so on.
It can be not only key clients,
but also marketologists,
analysts who add information
and managers who work on the market
if this information concerns
our key clients.
Therefore,
many people can be involved
in the creation of this database,
but the base holder must be one.
Then we assess
the current situation.
Remember,
we conducted a test
on client-orientedness.
You can assess
how you work with this company
by this test.
We assessed it by the satisfaction matrix,
and we concluded
how interesting it is
for both you and the client
what you lose and win,
and assessed your pros and cons.
The next stage is
how you work with the people
who make decisions
or influence the decision-making.
This also needs to be assessed
and understood.
Do you congratulate them on their birthday
or on professional holidays?
Do you call them
to talk about life?
You should have
not only professional relations.
Therefore,
you should analyze
the situation of this subject.
When you have done the analysis,
you have the whole picture in your hands.
You can see
what is happening to your key client.
After that, you set goals and tasks.
What do you want to do next?
What we discussed earlier
is one of the functions of a manager.
We discussed the proposal
on the development of relations with clients.
Here we set goals and tasks
on the development of relations
with this client.
The goals and tasks are set.
Remember,
they are digitized and specific.
It is desirable to achieve them
so that there is no demotivation.
That is,
such goals
that can be checked later
whether we have achieved them or not.
The next thing we do
when we have set goals and tasks,
we choose a strategy of work,
make a plan of events,
assign responsible people,
consolidate this responsibility.
Because not only a key client manager
can be involved in this work.
A manager is like a coordinator,
like a mini-manager,
and then
completely different categories
of company employees
can be involved,
and can help in one or another process.
When a new product is released,
brand managers, marketologists,
when financing and budgeting
the finance department,
when it comes to delivery,
logistics,
and so on.
Therefore,
such a plan is created,
it is approved,
it is agreed with the client,
and the work begins.
I would like to say
that in the end
control is necessary,
as in any work.
You have planned the work,
it is a stage of planning.
But control is necessary.
And it is necessary not only
in the end, but also in the intermediate period,
so that you
constantly keep your hand on the pulse,
so that you see how your relations develop,
so that it does not happen
that at the end of the period
you say,
I could not do it.
Therefore,
control is necessary.
In conclusion,
I would like to draw your attention
to who you need to cooperate with
and communicate with
in the company of key clients,
who are the key figures in making decisions,
who are they.
You have a scheme on the slide.
The first thing we pay attention to
is the person making the decision.
These are company managers,
commercial directors,
general directors,
purchasing directors,
if there are companies,
then he can make decisions.
We identify the main people,
we list their list,
contact phones,
and everything that is necessary
on the basis of data.
The next group of people
is the people who influence the decision.
Remember we said
that there should be contact groups
who can recommend,
not recommend.
The contact person
who influences the decision
can be the company's guardian,
maybe he is the father of the manager.
He can easily
advise him something.
If he has an influence
on the decision of his son,
it is very easy.
The main thing here is to identify
who this person is,
who can help him to talk to him,
to convince him.
There are three more categories of employees
or people who can help
to make decisions.
They are the people
who influence the decision.
The users of the products and services.
They can recommend,
not recommend,
want or not want to buy
this product.
The purchasing manager.
He may not even be a director,
but he can help you to talk to him.
You can't do anything,
you have to find another contact person.
Including the financial staff.
Why?
Because the financial staff
gives restrictions
that the purchasing manager
is guided by.
Therefore, whether you want it or not,
indirectly or directly,
the financial staff naturally
also influences the decision.
Therefore, the recommendation is
to consider as many people as possible.
Try to make contacts with them.
Moreover, informal contacts.
Both formal and informal.
In order to have the opportunity
to influence
the activity of your key client.
I want to say
that when contacts are not only
formal, the client can forgive you
a shortcoming,
increase in price,
and not react so quickly.
Because you
are practically a friend.
That's why
key clients are so
profitable, so attractive
for us, they give us such a turn,
such a profit.
That's why the strategy
called the client-oriented strategy
leads the company
to great success.
I would like to say in conclusion
that today we have considered
several topics
when it comes to finding your client.
The first thing we considered
is segmentation, because it helps
us to select our target segments.
The next thing we did
was to select
important clients,
just important, by matrix.
Then we selected key clients
and considered
how it is desirable
to build a work with key clients
so that it, of course,
affects the company's result,
the financial result
of your company.
Thank you for your attention.
I wish you success.
Be client-oriented and grow in your business.
All the best. Goodbye.